---
title: "A Robot, Dad?"
date: 2024-04-04T10:56:18-06:00
draft: false
tags: ["childhood"]
author: "Me"
---

> This story was written in 2006 when I was 24 years old. I'm reviving it here so it can live forever. 

#### Prologue

The following story is commonly referred to as the day that single-handedly ruined my entire childhood. Of course, that's just line that runs over and over in my head. But, in reality, it's become quite the opportunity to embarrass my father at family gatherings. Enjoy!

#### The Story

A child's mind is like an organic garden. Ripe with freshness. Clean with anticipation. A slate upon which amazing things can happen. As such, the mind of a child is also fragile. A rain drop in the desert or a flower in a hurricane. This particular child had such a mind. A mind blinded by the expanse of his own creativity. And this story is the representation of the day the hurricane came.

I remember the day as if Stephen Spielberg had been following me around with huge camera , a crew of hustling grips and studio executives. I remember every cloud in the sky the morning I woke up to this infamous ending of my innocence. Luckily for me, I had no comprehension of the loss I would receive that day. I suppose it's for the better, giving me a few hours to enjoy what's left of my childhood. On the other hand, some preparation would have allowed me one last dance in my mind. Akin to a convict on death row ordering his last meal. But, under the digression of fate, I was to remain under the guise of a normal day.

The morning progressed as any summer morning does in a child's home. Morning cereal, perhaps a light cartoon schedule. Lego's were the mainstay of my creative thinking. I was building a moon rover vehicle that morning. I remember searching for the right color of grey to match the hue on the actual NASA rover (matching the gold tin foil was impossible, for all intents and purposes). It pains me to recall the detail in this day, but eventually I assembled the rover, only to destroy in a great explosive catastrophe later know as Event 23.

Daily lunch rituals assembled the non-bread winning portion of the family. My sister joined us for typical peanut butter and fluff sandwiches. Glasses of red Kool-Aide lined the island counter top. Billy Joel was playing lightly in the background, via a local radio station.  Lunch was uneventful in retrospect, but it simply signaled the calm before the storm. The afternoon was filled with Disney Channel original shows. A practical puppet rendition of a public service announcement played tribute to learning in the summertime. I pondered the possibility of a shooting star crossing the stage at the commencement, but the pyrotechnics of the day didn't allow indoor charges. The sun was falling further into the Massachusetts skyline, casting a hue of orange and yellow onto the calico forests colorful from fallen leaves. The moment, now known as zero-hour, was upon us.

A jubilant father burst through the door of our three bedroom home. Now normally father was tired from the rigmarole of his workday, but today was different. Today he had a bounce to his step. He yelled at the top of his lungs, announcing his arrival, gathering the family. As we arrived, bright-eyed from the obvious difference in dad, we formed a circle around him, eagerly awaiting his announcement. His voice expressed the hullabaloo surrounding the event. He then delivered the final sentences of my childhood. He looked directly at me and proclaimed "I brought you something very special. You're going to love it, but you can't receive it till after dinner." Of course, this was nothing short of child abuse. Something strictly forbidden under modern day Geneva Conventions, even. To bring a child a present, yet make him wait till after dinner? Simply cruel.

Dinner appeared as a blur. I can't even recall the food group, let alone the entrée. My mind had begun it's rush into overdrive. I had checked out of every conversation, simply removed myself from a viable state of being. My mind methodically began to parse the information I had received. I was categorizing the "very special"  gifts I could be receiving. I was like an expert Rubicks cube player, lining everything up in my mind as quickly as I could. Of course, the first thing to enter my mind was a complete Lego set. Every piece of Lego, ever created, at my disposal. I quickly moved things into several categories: practical, fantastical, unimaginable. I quickly ruled out everything in the practical category, as "very special" things couldn't have a practical use in this world. As I worked out the numbers in my head, they only category that made send was unimaginable. It would be the only "special" thing that was good enough for such an occasion.

I quickly focused in on my most thought about fantasy. I quickly imagined my father had finally brought me home my own robot. The only thing I had ever wanted out of life.  A human-sized, walking, talking and possibly fire breathing robot. A slightly shiny aluminum finish, glowing with warmth from the status lights that outline his chest. Slightly eerie red eyes which were constantly scanning the horizon for possible threats. A pouch in the front, stolen from the kangaroo species, so I could tote my Lego's around with. He would be coated with rubber soles on his feet, making an easy task of tip-toeing through the kitchen at night. He would be strong enough for me to ride around on his back, jumping through puddles and hanging from monkey bars. The more I envisioned the robot, the more real he became. I even was contemplating assigning him a name, but agreed to remain neutral in case he was named from the factory.

Dinner was quickly approaching the end, and the sunlight was beginning to dwindle. But to a kid who was about to inherit a robot with night vision, the sun was no matter. I could feel the tension growing in my body, awaiting the final word from the dinner table so we could escape into the backyard and receive my prize. We finished as quickly as a family had ever finished the meal, and I sensed everyone knew about the robot already. My sister had already planned her school dance around his arrival, taking him as a date. Dad finally gave the word and in a flash, the family exited the kitchen. Everything was now happening in slow motion. I carefully examined every muscle movement while walking to the door, careful to not let one foot get too far ahead of the other. It was certainly be disastrous to trip up at this very moment.

As we rounded the corner of the door, heading outside, my eyes were adjusting to the change in lighting. As my pupils closed, my attention was focused to the center of the driveway. Dad had already prepared for the demonstration. I thought at that very moment how stupid I was. I should have looked outside for preparations. There was probably a fire truck outside awaiting the fire breathing demonstration, but I had no time for formalities now. Sitting in the middle of the driveway was a bright orange road cone, approximately 2 feet high. Not a normal road cone, mind you. This was a commercial grade, high-quality, durable piece of construction equipment. I quickly assessed the cone, and upon final assumption, I gathered the robot to be bigger than first imagined. Such a road cone couldn't possibly be necessary for a five-foot robot. The new estimations quickly raised the height to over seven-feet. The fire from his mouth must have been much larger than the initial guesstimate.

We gathered around the cone, weary of the proper distance to keep between yourself and a seven-foot fire-breathing robot. We all stepped back, giving the autonomous creature room to analyze the environment. We didn't want a robot catastrophe on the very first day. I quickly scanned the area for signs of my father, and saw him striding out the door onto the driveway. I was sure the remote control for the bot was to be in his hands, but he exited empty handed. "Great," I thought; the robot was completely self-aware. He could turn himself on and off at his will. This demonstration was going to be one for the ages.

As Dad slowly strutted toward the center of the cone, a big smile came across his face. He sure was proud of whatever he was about to display, calming my fears about an inferior plastic robot of some sort. "What do you think?" he said. The crowd erupted into laughter. It was almost as if he was trying to get everyone excited for the show. Everybody was preparing for the main event, everyone except Dad. A look of disappointment drew across his face. He shrugged his shoulders in uncertainty, asking again "What? What do you think of it?" His eyes drew directly to the cone. I threw in another laugh, just to let him know we were already on to his robot plans, but he wasn't about to crack. I was about to confront him was the startling truth that I already knew about the robot, when he turned to us and started explaining the lineage of the road cone. My jaw dropped to the pavement. I could tell from the description of his story, much like this one, that he was indeed very serious about the road cone.

I dropped to my knees and screamed at the top of my lungs. How could somebody do this to a kid? My mind was unwinding all the dreams and ideas placed inside, inspecting each one for a sign of a road cone. I couldn't possibly imagine what one was to do with a road cone, until my father spoke again. "You can ride your bike around it . and stuff," he proclaimed. He was partially sure that the cone was to be a great hit with the family, yet we were struggling to see the use. I picked myself up off the ground, brushing my knees off as I raised to my feet. We retreated to the safety of the house, ducking the darkness that was falling outside. I brushed my teeth, with no request from my parents and quickly slipped into bed. My thoughts that night were filled with safety concerns regarding the possible uses of the road cone. I was also concerned for the truck for which the cone fell off of, wondering if people were at risk because we had their cone. My thoughts from that night on were the practical type. I never again had such the imagination to conjure up a fire-breathing, night-vision, seven foot tall humanesque robot. As I feel asleep, a calm came over me. It was the final notion I had grown up.